This project has moved! Check it out at https://github.com/jmlewis/divvy.

Machine learning techniques are increasingly essential to the conduct of scientific inquiry across many domains. Modern science is often concerned with large datasets of high dimensionality where even the early exploratory stages of data analysis require sophisticated statistical and computa- tional manipulation for visualization and interpretation. Datasets will only continue to grow in complexity, and thus continued effort is required in developing robust machine learning methods that scale well with the number of samples, dimensions, and sources of information present in data. At the same time, in order to be useful to the maximum number of researchers across the greatest number of domains, these methods must be easy to utilize, provide sound intuitions concerning their behavior, and provide some facility for observing and evaluating their results.

Our research proposal will bring significant advances in these areas to the fields of dimensionality reduction and cluster analysis. Dimensionality reduction techniques seek to find a lower dimensional representation of a high dimensional dataset such that some desired structure in the data is preserved while other characteristics are discarded. Cluster analysis techniques discover partitions in data such that samples within a partition (or cluster) are similar to each other and dissimilar to samples outside the partition. Both techniques are fundamental to data analysis and unsupervised machine learning, and they share a deep theoretical connection.